1. What is the most important reason that astronomers have learned more about our planetary system in the last 30-40 years than all of history before then. 
a. astronomers today are a lot smarter than astronomers were earlier 
b. the Hubble Space Telescope 
c. we have been able to send spacecraft to gather information about planets and moons up close 
d. radio telescope arrays allow astronomers to make out details on the planets that they have never been able to see before 
e. the planets (moving in their slow orbits around the Sun) happen to be closer to the Earth in the last 30 years than at any previous time in human history

2. The planet closest to the Sun in the solar system is: 
a. Mercury 
b. Pluto 
c. Venus 
d. Neptune 
e. none of the above

3. Which planet in the solar system has not been examined by spacecraft instruments that have either flown by or orbited them? 
a. Earth 
b. Neptune 
c. Venus 
d. Saturn 
e. you can't fool me, spacecraft have visited all the planets in our solar system

4. Which of the following is NOT a terrestrial planet? 
a. Mars 
b. Earth 
c. Jupiter 
d. Venus 
e. Mercury

5. Which of the following characteristics do all four terrestrial planets have in common? 
a. the all have one or more moons 
b. all have liquid water on their surfaces 
c. they all rotate in 24 hours or less 
d. they all have thick atmospheres 
e. they all have solid surfaces with signs of geological activity on them

6. The smaller objects in the solar system made of rock and metal (most of which orbit between Jupiter and Mars) are called: 
a. comets 
b. satellites 
c. Titius-Bode objects 
d. asteroids 
e. Silicates

7. The smaller objects in the solar system composed mainly of ices (frozen gases) that usually orbit far from the Sun are called: 
a. snowroids 
b. comets 
c. asteroids 
d. satellites 
e. Jovians

8. In the four terrestrial planets, the densest, heaviest materials are at the center and not evenly distributed throughout the planet. Scientists interpret this observation to mean that: 
a. the four terrestrial planets must once have been inside the Sun 
b. the four terrestrial planets must once have been hot enough to be molten (like a liquid) 
c. the four terrestrial planets must have formed where Jupiter and Saturn now are 
d. the four terrestrial planets must have collided with each other many times

9. In general, the further planets are from the Sun, the cooler they are. What other factor can have a significant influence on a planet’s surface temperature? 
a. its atmosphere (whether it has one and how thick it is) 
b. the number of large moons that are close to the planet 
c. how fast the planet is spinning (the length of its day) 
d. whether its core has a lot of iron in it 
e. none of the above (only distance from the Sun affects a planet’s temperature)

10. What is one way that astronomers have actually gotten an idea of the age of the surfaces of terrestrial planets other than the Earth? 
a. looking at the colors different surfaces show 
b. bringing back samples and run radioactive dating tests 
c. counting craters 
d. measuring the thickness of the atmosphere above each surface 
e. looking in the instruction manual that comes with each planet

11. The inner planets are made mostly of rock and metal because: 
a. lighter materials cannot orbit the Sun; they would fall in immediately 
b. the Sun is made mostly of rock and metal and the inner planets are closest to the Sun 
c. it was so hot where the inner planets formed that the lighter materials evaporated 
d. Jupiter's large gravity immediately attracted all the lighter materials, and so there were few light atoms left by the time the inner planets were ready to form 
e. this is an unsolved problem in astronomy

12. Which of the following statements about Mercury's orbit is TRUE? 
a. Mercury is the most distant planet from the Sun 
b. Mercury has the highest speed in its orbit of any planet 
c. Mercury's orbit is the closest to a perfect circle of any planet 
d. Mercury takes 88 Earth years to orbit the Sun 
e. Mercury always remains exactly the same distance from the Sun as it orbits

13. Which of the following is made of the densest material? 
a. Mercury 
b. the Moon 
c. the Earth 
d. all of the above have the same density 
e. we don’t know, because have not measured the density of any other planet except the Earth

14. The most likely models of the planet Mercury indicate that more than half the planet may be composed of: 
a. water 
b. metals 
c. ammonia and methane ice 
d. very light and porous rocks 
e. the element mercury

15. Mercury is a small planet and therefore has trouble holding on to an atmosphere. How then do scientists account for the extremely thin atmosphere that was found around the planet in 1985? 
a. Mercury is so hot that gas is constantly evaporating from its molten lakes and oceans 
b. Mercury's moon is so close to it that it can pull out some material from the planet 
c. the Sun's "wind" of particles is chipping atoms off the surface of Mercury 
d. Mercury's active volcanoes give off a lot of material; while much escapes, a certain number of atoms "exhaled" by recent volcanoes are in orbit around Mercury at any given time 
e. no one can suggest any explanation for the atmosphere at the present time; it's a mystery

16. Which of the following statements about temperature changes on Mercury is correct? 
a. it is always hot everywhere on Mercury, because the planet is so close to the Sun 
b. it is always cold all over Mercury, because the planet has no significant atmosphere 
c. one side of Mercury is always extremely hot, while the other side is about the same temperature as Los Angeles on Earth 
d. the difference in temperature between Mercury's daylight side and its night side is the greatest difference of any planet in the solar system 
e. we suspect Mercury must be warm, but we have not been able to measure any temperatures on the planet with our instruments

17. The spacecraft that really gave scientists their first good close-up look of the planet Mercury was: a. Voyager 1 
b. Mariner 10 
c. Galileo 
d. the series of Mercury capsules 
e. New Horizons

18. What formation or formations are evidence that the planet Mercury may have shrunk (gotten a bit smaller) as it cooled? 
a. the Caloris basin 
b. the large basins in general 
c. the long scarps or cliffs 
d. the thin atmosphere emerging from inside the planet 

19. The largest impact basin on Mercury (located on that part of the planet which is closest to the Sun at noon) is called: 
a. Sunstroke 
b. Caloris 
c. Shakespeare 
d. Mariner 
e. Columbo

20. Why are the largest craters we find on the Moon and Mercury so much larger than the largest craters we find on the Earth? 
a. because the Moon and Mercury have larger gravity than Earth, and this can attract larger pieces 
b. because the Moon and Mercury do not have atmospheres to protect them from the largest pieces that can hit 
c. because the Earth's magnetic field protects us from larger impacts 
d. because the Moon and Mercury have much larger volcanic eruptions 
e. because the largest craters were made early in each world's history, and geologic activity has erased all traces of this early period on the Earth's surface

21. The same gas makes up most of the atmosphere of Mars and Venus. This gas is: 
a. water vapor 
b. nitrogen 
c. ozone 
d. ammonia gas 
e. carbon dioxide

22. Why does Mars have an overall reddish color when we see its surface from afar? 
a. This is an optical illusion caused by the Earth’s atmosphere scattering the colors of light differently b. Mars is completely cloudy, and its clouds are made of red materials 
c. The material of Mars’ surface contains a lot of iron oxide, the same chemistry that makes rusting metals look reddish 
d. the giant volcanoes on Mars are constantly spewing out reddish lava 
e. The martians are constantly at war, and spilling a lot of red blood

23. Why is it so much easier to determine the length of the day on Mars than on Venus? 
a. Mars’ atmosphere is generally pretty clear (so the surface is visible) while Venus is always cloudy 
b. Mars rotates really slowly, so it’s easy to follow; Venus rotates so fast, it’s hard to track 
c. Mars is much larger in diameter than Venus is, so it’s easier to see 
d. Mars is always much closer to the Earth than Venus 
e. Mars is always visible in our nighttime sky, while Venus is only visible in the daytime sky

24. Which of the following is NOT a way that Venus resembles the Earth? 
a. its size (diameter) 
b. its overall density 
c. the surface gravity (which tells us how much we would weigh there) 
d. the thickness and pressure of its atmosphere

25. The spacecraft that sent back the most detailed radar images of Venus and showed us features as small as a football field is (it was also the first American mission to Venus): 
a. Viking 
b. Pioneer 
c. Venera 
d. Magellan 
e. Mariner

26. About 75% of the surface of Venus consists of 
a. high volcanic plateaus, many of which are currently erupting lava 
b. lowland lava plains 
c. wall-to-wall impact craters 
d. vast criss-crossing channels carrying liquid lava 
e. lush jungles growing very effectively because it is so warm and humid there

27. The (Russian) spacecraft that soft-landed successfully on the surface of Venus (and briefly sent back pictures while sitting in that destructive environment) were called 
a. Magellan 
b. Venera 
c. Pioneer 
d. Voyager 
e. Bayonne

28. Which of the following statements about the planet Venus is true? 
a. its thick nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere acts like a greenhouse, keeping it hot 
b. it rotates on its axis in the same direction as the Earth does 
c. it has a thick layer of clouds containing sulfuric acid droplets 
d. the atmospheric pressure near the surface is about the same as Earth's 
e. the "face of Miss Piggy" feature indicates that Venus is inhabited

29. What is one way that we humans are currently making the atmosphere of the Earth more like that of Venus? 
a. we are adding more oxygen to the atmosphere by growing more plants and trees 
b. we are adding carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, which is leading to global warming 
c. we are setting up a lot of equipment at the north and south poles to cool our planet down 
d. we have more than doubled the mass of the Earth’s atmosphere by making additional air in our factories

30. The observation that began the 19th and early 20th century fascination with Mars as a place for life was: 
a. the discovery of the Martian moons 
b. Schiaparelli's seeing what seemed to him to be long straight features on the red planet 
c. Percival Lowell's discovery of an entire network of artificial canals built by martians 
d. the images sent back by the Viking spacecraft mission 
e. the landing of Martian spacecraft in New Jersey in 1938

31. The person who really publicized the idea of canals on Mars and impressed it on the public mind was: 
a. Orson Welles 
b. Asaph Hall 
c. Percival Lowell 
d. H. G. Wells 
e. Frank Drake

32. One way in which Mars closely resembles the Earth is: 
a. its mass 
b. the length of its year (period of revolution) 
c. the length of its day (period of rotation) 
d. the make-up and thickness of its atmosphere 
e. the surface gravity (i.e. what we would weigh there)

33. The first spacecraft to orbit another planet circled Mars in 1971. It was: 
a. Viking 1 
b. Voyager 1 
c. Apollo 1 
d. Mariner 9 
e. Venera 11

34. There was a pair of spacecraft whose components both orbited the planet Mars and landed on its surface in 1976. These spacecraft were called: 
a. Voyager 
b. Viking 
c. Magellan 
d. Galileo 
e. Percival & Lowell

35. Which of the following would NOT be one of the problems faced by an unprotected Earthling stranded on Mars? (Unprotected meaning no space suit.) 
a. the composition of the atmosphere 
b. the lack of liquid water today on the surface 
c. the low atmospheric pressure 
d. the lack of any ozone layer shielding 
e. the extreme (high) heat at most latitudes 

36. The total surface area of planet Mars is roughly equal to the 
a. surface area of the Earth's continents 
b. surface area of Venus 
c. surface area of the Moon 
d. total surface area of the Earth 
e. you can't fool me, Mars is bigger in surface area than any of the above 

37. One of the most impressive features of the geology of Mars is an uplifted area about the size of North America, with volcanoes on it, which is called the 
a. Olympus Mountains 
b. Tharsis Bulge 
c. Hellas Basin 
d. Mariner Valley 
e. Bayonne pimple 

38. The largest volcano on Mars is called: 
a. the Red Spot 
b. Olympus Mons (Mt. Olympus) 
c. Mariner Valley 
d. Hellas 
e. Mount Maxwell

39. Which of the following statements about Valles Marineris, the great "grand canyon system" on Mars is true? 
a. it is much shorter than the Grand Canyon in Arizona, but much much wider 
b. it was discovered by Giovanni Schiaparelli in the 19th century 
c. it was hard to photograph because it is always covered by wind-blown dust 
d. landslides have helped broaden the canyons since they were first formed 
e. although the canyons are long and wide, they are very shallow, only a few feet deep

40. On some parts of Mars, it gets cold enough for a gas to freeze out of the atmosphere that does not freeze out by itself at the temperatures and pressures on Earth. This gas makes up some of the polar caps on Mars and is: 
a. water 
b. argon 
c. carbon dioxide 
d. methane 
e. Oxygen

41. Which of the following is NOT a way we have studied the planet Mars so far? 
a. observing it through telescopes from Earth 
b. sending a spacecraft into orbit around it 
c. landing a spacecraft on the surface and examining the soil in an automated laboratory 
d. studying samples of Mars that were blasted off Mars by impacts long ago, and found later on Earth 
e. sending spacecraft to Mars which have brought samples of the planet back to Earth

42. What makes astronomers believe that Mars once had rivers and running water? 
a. there is a grand canyon system about 2,500 mi long on its surface (all of it made by running water) 
b. the volcanoes today show evidence of water coming from their highest points and running down (implying this would have happened even more long ago) 
c. Images from orbiting spacecraft reveal ancient channels that look like dried-up river beds on Earth (and our rovers show geological formations made by running water) 
d. giant basins (like Hellas) show evidence of being filled with frozen water that was once probably a sea 

43. Mars rovers (such as Opportunity and Curiosity) have identified evidence that their landing sites were once under water. Which of the following is among the kinds of evidence they have identified? 
a. they found liquid water deposits just under the surface when they dug down a few feet 
b. they found rock formations that show the area was under water and also minerals that only form in water 
c. they found warm salt water spurting up in the form of geysers 
d. they found a lot of water vapor in the martian atmosphere just above their landing sites 
e. they found buried ropes and buoys from ancient martian swimming holes

44. The Viking spacecraft were designed -- in part -- to search for life on Mars. Which of the following statements about the results of these experiments is true? 
a. Viking discovered a form of life on Mars that does not require water to thrive 
b. Viking did not discover larger life forms on Mars, but did find some Mars bacteria 
c. Viking did not discover life on Mars today, but did find a lot of fossils indicating Mars had life in the past 
d. Viking found that the surface of Mars in the two places it searched did not have any life or even life's building blocks 
e. Viking did find a whole Martian civilization, but they are hiding it from the news media

45. A main difference between asteroids and comets is that asteroids are mostly made of
rock and comets are mostly made of
a. metals
b. carbon compounds
c. ice
d. vapor (gas)
e. you can't fool me, astronomers don't really know what comets are made of

46. The first asteroid to be discovered (which is also the largest one) is called
a. Ceres
b. Gaspra
c. Davida
d. Eros
e. Fraknoi

47. According to astronomical tradition, who gets to suggest the name for a newly discovered asteroid? 
a. the president of the country of the discoverer 
b. a special committee of the U.N. set up for this purpose 
c. the discoverer of the asteroid 
d. a special committee in Italy, where the first asteroid was discovered 
e. authors of astronomy textbooks

48. If there are at least a million asteroids, how did spacecraft like Galileo survive their trip through the asteroid belt? 
a. NASA sends its spacecraft above and below the orbits of the asteroids in the belt to avoid collisions 
b. spacecraft use a magnetic repulsion tool to make sure asteroids do not come too close 
c. although there are many asteroids, they are widely spaced (there is lots of space between them) 
d. the known asteroids are typically less than a centimeter across, so they do not represent a danger to spacecraft 
e. you can't fool me, NASA has lost over a dozen spacecraft to collisions with asteroids

49. A baseball pitcher wants to impress his girl-friend with how strong his throwing arm is. On which of the following bodies would the pitcher be MOST likely to be able to throw a baseball (a fast ball) so fast it would actually go into orbit? 
a. Earth 
b. Mars 
c. Ganymede 
d. Titan 
e. asteroid Ida

50. The two asteroids from which close-up images and data have been returned by the Galileo spacecraft are: 
a. Ida and Gaspra 
b. Vesta and Ceres 
c. Eros and Toutatis 
d. Chiron and Pholus

51. The Shoemaker-NEAR spacecraft explored two asteroids, Mathilde and Eros. A big difference between them is that: 
a. Mathilde appears to be pile of “rubble” (a collection of separate rocks) while Eros is solid 
b. Mathilde is a “real” asteroid, while Eros is a comet that has lost some of its ice 
c. Mathilde is always inside the orbit of the Earth, while Eros is always outside our planet’s orbit 
d. Mathilde is going to impact the Earth, while Eros will never come near our planet

52. When the Dawn spacecraft explored the largest asteroid Ceres, it discovered white spots that appear to be salt and volcanic mountains made of water ice. This led astronomers to which of the following ideas: 
a. all asteroids are made of frozen water 
b. Ceres is really one of the terrestrial planets that got kicked out of its former orbit 
c. Ceres may have (or may have had) a liquid ocean under its crust
d. Ceres formed from the breakup of a much larger body, a solid planet bigger than Jupiter 

53. In 2013, a small stony asteroid collided with the Earth above the Russian city of Chelyabinsk. What was the result? 
a. A large earthquake was felt all over Europe and Asia 
b. A fireball briefly brighter than the Sun could be seen in the sky 
c. It broke apart and large pieces of rock fell from the sky, killing thousands of innocent people 
d. The Earth’s orbit around the Sun changed in a measurable way 
e. It burned up so high in the atmosphere, absolutely nothing could be felt or seen on the ground

54. The spacecraft that got the closest to the nucleus of Halley's Comet and sent back dramatic photographs of what the nucleus looked like was: 
a. Giotto 
b. Venera 
c. Pioneer 
d. Mariner 13 
e. the Enterprise 

55. Which of the following statements about the tails of comets is FALSE? 
a. the tail always points away from the Sun 
b. some comets have both a gas tail and a dust tail 
c. the tail of a comet can sometimes be ahead of the comet in its orbit 
d. a comet always has a nice long tail, even when it is far from the Sun 
e. the Earth can pass through the tail of a comet without suffering any harm

56. Which of the following is NOT an accomplishment of the Rosetta mission to Comet Churyumov-Gerasimenko (C-G)? 
a. Rosetta matched orbits with Comet C-G and flew alongside 
b. Rosetta dropped the Philae lander on Comet C-G 
c. Rosetta took close-up images of Comet C-G and sent them back to Earth 
d. Rosetta took samples of the surface material of Comet C-G and sent them back to Earth 
e. Rosetta turned off the spacecraft systems to save power far from the Sun, and turned them back on as it got closer to the Sun

57. Between 1992 and today, astronomers using large telescopes have discovered many icy pieces that orbit in the same region as the orbit of Pluto. These are believed to be members of the 
a. asteroid belt (which have escaped) 
b. Kuiper belt 
c. Oort cloud 
d. ring around Pluto 
e. the rock and roll band called Bill Haley and the Comets 

58. The comet that broke into more than 20 pieces and then collided with Jupiter in 1994 was 
a. Giacobini-Zinner 
b. Kohoutek 
c. Halley's Comet 
d. Eros 
e. Shoemaker-Levy 9
